 ▐▛███▜▌   Claude Code v2.1.223
▝▜█████▛▘  Fable 5 · Claude Max
  ▘▘ ▝▝    ~/gitlab/dox-populi


❯ /clear                                                                        

❯ I'm on branch tutorial-one of the dox-populi Screeps project. Get oriented    
  from your loaded memory and the repo, then wait for my task — no tool calls   
  or work until I state it.                                                     
                                                                                
  Framing: the blog is a storyspace (hypertext), not a numbered series. Each    
  tutorial-x branch builds out its own fast path blog. We are working the fast  
  path only. Memory's blog-storyspace.md is the current model; anywhere older   
  memory mentions a numbered series, a post slate, or "off-series," that        
  framing is dead.                                                              
                                                                                
  State on this branch:                                                         
                                                                                
  - The accessibility build is done and was witnessed working: a nix-vendored   
  open-source Screeps server plus a browser viewer built on the open-sourced    
  @screeps/renderer — the whole loop (run, deploy, place spawn, watch) runs     
  from the VM with no purchase of the game. Code in viewer/ and flake.nix.      
  - README.md carries the corrected Quickstart. docs/SECRIX.md covers secret    
  create/edit. docs/viewer-contract.md holds the renderer + protocol contract.  
  - The fast-path blog is drafted in blog/tutorial-one/storyspace/fast-path/:   
  promise.md, narrative.md (a thin layer over README.md — README is the         
  canonical ru is commentary over it), exercises.md. Thestoryspace model is in  
  blog/tutorial-one/storyspace/blog-series-structure.md; this stage's map is    
  storyspace/structure/tutorial-one-structure                                   
                                                                                
  Everything drafted is a candidate for my pe, I rule. Wait for my task.        

● Understood. On tutorial-one, fast path only, storyspace model. Waiting for
  your task.

✻ Crunched for 2s

❯ /home/mlitchard/gitlab/dox-populi/blog/tutorial-one/storyspace/fast-path/prom 
  ise.md is condescending and trite. We've captured curiosity, now we're trying 
  to build enthusiasm and turn it into action. these are young adults, not      
  children.                                                                     

  Read 1 file, recalled 1 memory (ctrl+o to expand)

● Write(blog/tutorial-one/storyspace/fast-path/promise.md)
  ⎿  Added 29 lines, removed 32 lines
       1  # Promise (fast path)
       2  
       3 -Draft for his pen. Scope: what it takes to get the project runn
         -ing so                                                         
       4 -you can engage it through the browser client. Audience: someone
         - just                                                          
       5 -learning software engineering. Assumes you've read the manifest
         -o                                                              
       6 -(post zero — <!-- TODO: link -->); the link is there if you hav
         -en't.                                                          
       3 +Draft for his pen. Scope: get the project running and engage it
       4 +through the browser viewer. Audience: aspirant, post-manifesto,
       5 +ready to act. Manifesto: <!-- TODO: link -->.                  
       6  
       8 -## The shape of the project                                    
       7 +## What you get                                                
       8  
      10 -You boot one VM. Inside it:                                    
       9 +A Screeps colony you own end to end. The server runs in a VM on
         + your                                                          
      10 +machine. The viewer runs in your browser. The program driving t
         +he                                                             
      11 +colony is two readable files, and the checkers give you a verdi
         +ct on                                                          
      12 +every change you make to them.                                 
      13  
      12 -- a spec in Paradox (dox/creeps.dox), written with an llm, whic
         -h the                                                          
      13 -  checker verifies and from which Paradox generates the decisio
         -n logic;                                                       
      14 -- a harness in TypeScript (harness/main.ts) that makes the game
         - calls,                                                        
      15 -  using that generated logic;                                  
      16 -- a private game server and a browser viewer, both built by nix
         -. Dependencies:                                                
      17 -  QEMU,tmux and a browser.                                     
      14 +## The shape                                                   
      15  
      19 -You don't have to understand all of it to start. This path gets
         - it                                                            
      20 -running and lets you watch and poke at it; the deeper stories a
         -re                                                             
      21 -linked from the exercises for when you want them.              
      16 +One VM. Inside it:                                             
      17  
      23 -## What you'll learn (skills)                                  
      18 +- dox/creeps.dox — the spec, written with an LLM. The Paradox c
         +hecker                                                         
      19 +  verifies its named properties, and Paradox generates the deci
         +sion                                                           
      20 +  logic from it.                                               
      21 +- harness/main.ts — the TypeScript harness that makes the game 
         +calls,                                                         
      22 +  using that generated logic.                                  
      23 +- a private game server and a browser viewer, both built by nix
         +.                                                              
      24  
      25 -1. How to boot the stage VM and open the dev environment.      
      26 -2. How to run the private server and push your code to it.     
      27 -3. How to open the browser viewer, place your spawn, and watch 
         -the                                                            
      28 -   harvester work.                                             
      29 -4. How to read the two files that hold the program (the spec an
         -d the                                                          
      30 -   harness) well enough to change one thing and see what the ch
         -eckers                                                         
      31 -   say.                                                        
      25 +Your machine needs QEMU, tmux, and a browser. Everything else i
         +s in                                                           
      26 +the ISO.                                                       
      27  
      33 -## Equipment                                                   
      28 +## By the end                                                  
      29  
      35 -- A machine with QEMU and tmux.                                
      36 -- The stage ISO: <!-- TODO: Hetzner link --> boot it; the dev  
      37 -  environment is already inside.                               
      30 +- The server and viewer are up, running from your VM.          
      31 +- Your code is deployed; you've placed the spawn and watched th
         +e                                                              
      32 +  harvester work.                                              
      33 +- You've changed a line of the spec and read the checkers' verd
         +ict.                                                           
      34  
      39 -## Where to go                                                 
      35 +## Start                                                       
      36  
      41 -- Run it: the narrative walks the steps (narrative.md).        
      42 -- Do it yourself: the exercises (exercises.md).                
      43 -- Want the story behind any of it: each exercise links to the s
         -ection                                                         
      44 -  that tells it.                                               
      37 +- The stage ISO: <!-- TODO: Hetzner link -->. Boot it; the dev 
      38 +  environment is inside.                                       
      39 +- narrative.md walks the whole run.                            
      40 +- exercises.md is the same run, done by you. Each exercise link
         +s to                                                           
      41 +  the section of the storyspace that tells the story behind it.

● Rewritten. The draft now opens with what they own — server in their VM, viewer
  in their browser, the program in two readable files — then moves straight to
  action: shape, end state, start. Cut "You don't have to understand all of it
  to start," the "What you'll learn (skills)" list (now "By the end," stated as
  things done), and the hand-holding asides. Equipment folded into the shape
  section; the ISO moved into Start since booting it is the first action.

✻ Baked for 47s

※ recap: Rewriting the fast-path blog draft promise.md on tutorial-one to respect the aspirant audience and drive action. The rewrite is done in the file, awaiting your review and pen.

❯ I have a stretch goal challenge for this section, does mention of it go in    
  the promis.md                                                                 

● Yes — one line. The promise is where the reader decides the path is worth
  their time, and a stretch goal raises the ceiling of what's on offer. Mention
  it at the end of "By the end" or "Start" as a single sentence pointing at it;
  the challenge itself lives in exercises.md.

✻ Sautéed for 4s

❯ narrative.md is trite does not add anything the readme doesn't have           

● Reading narrative.md and README.md side by side, then redrafting narrative so
  it carries only what the README can't say.

  Read 2 files (ctrl+o to expand)

● Write(blog/tutorial-one/storyspace/fast-path/narrative.md)
  ⎿  Added 35 lines, removed 34 lines
       1  # Getting it running (fast path)
       2  
       3 -Read README.md in it's entirety. The intent is that you get    
       4 -to a running state quickly                                     
       5 -Draft for his pen. The steps live in the [README](../../../../R
         -EADME.md);                                                     
       6 -this is the narrative over them — what each step means and why 
         -it's                                                           
       7 -worth your attention. Read the README's Quickstart for the exac
         -t                                                              
       8 -commands; read here for what you're looking at. Scope: running 
         -the                                                            
       9 -project and engaging it through the client. The debugging and t
         -he                                                             
      10 -corrections behind all of it live in the meander build node; ve
         -rbatim                                                         
      11 -quotes wait until the transcript is in docs/unedited and verifi
         -ed.                                                            
       3 +Draft for his pen. Read the README in its entirety — it is the 
         +run:                                                           
       4 +exact commands, a checkmark after every step. This file is the 
       5 +commentary over it: what each command sets in motion, and what 
         +you're                                                         
       6 +looking at when it lands. The goal is a running state quickly. 
         +The                                                            
       7 +debugging and corrections behind all of it live in the meander 
         +build                                                          
       8 +node; verbatim quotes wait until the transcript is in docs/uned
         +ited                                                           
       9 +and verified.                                                  
      10  
      13 -## Boot into the environment                                   
      11 +The README has two quickstarts — pick by host. Both end at the 
         +same                                                           
      12 +dev shell, and from there the run is three commands.           
      13  
      15 -The README's Quickstart is one VM and a couple of commands. The
         - thing                                                         
      16 -to notice: your host needs only QEMU, and everything else — the
         - whole                                                         
      17 -dev environment, the checkers, the server, the viewer — arrives
         - inside                                                        
      18 -the VM, already built. You land in a shell where the whole tool
         -chain is                                                       
      19 -already on the path.                                           
      14 +## What `nix run .#server` starts                              
      15  
      21 -## The server is real, and yours                               
      16 +The open-source Screeps server, built from source by nix, holdi
         +ng a                                                           
      17 +world of its own on your machine. Once it's up, ticks pass, sou
         +rces                                                           
      18 +sit ready, and the world waits for a player. State lives in    
      19 +`.server-data/`, which is why `stop` keeps your world and      
      20 +`reset-local` gives you a fresh one.                           
      21  
      23 -`nix run .#server` It is the open-source Screeps server,       
      24 -built from source on your machine, running your own world. The 
         -game you                                                       
      25 -are about to watch is one you host.                            
      22 +## What `nix run .#deploy-local` builds                        
      23  
      27 -## Your spec becomes the colony's operator                     
      24 +This is where the architecture shows up. The pipeline reads    
      25 +`dox/creeps.dox`, Paradox verifies the spec's named properties 
         +and                                                            
      26 +generates the decision logic, tsc typechecks `harness/main.ts` 
         +against                                                        
      27 +that generated code, and the bundle lands on the server as `mai
         +n.js`.                                                         
      28 +From then on the server calls that bundle every tick. Two files
         + you                                                           
      29 +can read — the spec and the harness — are now the only player i
         +n the                                                          
      30 +world.                                                         
      31  
      29 -`nix run .#deploy-local` bundles the spec and harness into the 
         -code the                                                       
      30 -server runs every tick. From here the colony does what the spec
         - says —                                                        
      31 -you wrote the orders, and now they run.                        
      32 +## What you're watching in the viewer                          
      33  
      33 -## Place the spawn and watch                                   
      34 +The viewer reads your server's socket and draws its world with 
         +the                                                            
      35 +open-sourced renderer. Placing the spawn is your one manual act
         + — the                                                         
      36 +game has always asked the player to choose that tile. Everythin
         +g after                                                        
      37 +the click is the spec executing: the spawn builds a harvester, 
         +the                                                            
      38 +harvester walks to the source, fills, walks back, delivers, and
         + starts                                                        
      39 +again. That loop on screen is this stage's deliverable — a     
      40 +specification, run through the checkers, driving a live creep o
         +n a                                                            
      41 +server you host.                                               
      42  
      35 -`nix run .#client` opens the viewer. You place the spawn yourse
         -lf, with                                                       
      36 -a click, the way the game has always asked you to — then the ha
         -rvester                                                        
      37 -appears and starts its cycle: to the source, fill up, back to t
         -he spawn,                                                      
      38 -deliver. That loop is the whole point of this stage: a specific
         -ation you                                                      
      39 -wrote, running as a live creep, on hardware you own, rendered b
         -y open                                                         
      40 -software you built.                                            
      41 -                                                               
      43  ## Next
      44  
      44 -- Change something and see what the checkers say: the          
      45 +- Change something and read the checkers' verdict: the         
      46    [exercises](exercises.md).
      46 -- How the viewer came to exist at all — the search that came up
         - empty,                                                        
      47 -  and the build: the meander build node.                       
      47 +- How the viewer came to exist — the search and the build: the 
         +meander                                                        
      48 +  build node.                                                  

● Redrafted. The step-by-step restatement is gone; each section now answers a
  question the README leaves open: what the server is doing before any code
  arrives (and why stop and reset-local differ), what the deploy pipeline
  actually runs — spec read, Paradox verifies the named properties and generates
  the decision logic, tsc typechecks the harness, bundle lands as main.js,
  server calls it every tick — and what the viewer is showing: after the one
  manual spawn click, everything on screen is the spec executing. Your "read the
  README in its entirety" instruction leads the file.

✻ Crunched for 58s

※ recap: We're revising the tutorial-one fast-path blog drafts. I rewrote promise.md and then narrative.md so it only adds commentary the README lacks. Next: you review the narrative.md redraft and rule on it.

❯ given blooms taxonomy I want to offer different level of challenges. in this  
  tutorial section, the obvious point of variance is how the spawn gets placed. 
  So I want you to use approriate agents to research different methods that     
  one might use to place a spawn. this is the stuff to learn beyond basic bloom 
  level one. we will then discuss what would be a good lvl 2 or 3 task and      
  what would be more challenging. These all align with the throughline,         
  students be amazed at what you can accomplish, but at the same time I do not  
  want to frustrate                                                             

● Two agents in parallel: one reads this repo to establish what spawn placement
  touches today (the viewer's manual placement path, the server API it calls,
  what terrain and room data are reachable from the harness and spec); one
  researches how Screeps players and open-source bots choose a spawn location
  (the algorithms and the signals they weigh). Then I report back and we discuss
  the levels.

● 2 background agents launched (↓ to manage)
   ├ Explore (Map spawn placement in repo)
   └ Agent (Research spawn placement methods)

● Both agents are running — one mapping the placement path in this repo, one
  researching community placement methods. I'll report their findings when they
  finish.

✻ Worked for 33s

● Agent "Map spawn placement in repo" finished · 14m 5s
● The repo map is in; the community-methods agent is still running. I'll give
  the combined report when it lands.

✻ Crunched for 3s

● Agent "Research spawn placement methods" finished · 15m 0s

● Both reports are in. Here's the combined picture.

  One fact shapes every challenge: the first spawn and every later spawn live on
  different layers. The first spawn is an HTTP action — POST 
  /api/game/place-spawn — made before any game code runs. In this repo that call
  already exists as Api.placeSpawn in viewer/src/protocol.ts; the click handler
  in viewer/src/main.ts is the only caller. The harness can't reach it, because
  loop() doesn't run until a spawn exists. Spawns two and up are placed from
  game code with room.createConstructionSite(x, y, STRUCTURE_SPAWN). So a "place
  the first spawn in code" challenge lives in the viewer or a flake app, while
  a "plan a spawn position" challenge framed as the second spawn lives in the
  harness and spec — the layer where the rest of the tutorial already works.

  The ladder of methods, simplest to hardest (each rung has a real open-source
  reference):

  1. Rule checklist / simple heuristics — a tile near a source with N free
  neighbors, or the midpoint of sources + controller snapped to buildable
  terrain. A few lines over the terrain grid. The midpoint version fails when
  the midpoint lands in a wall pocket — a teachable failure.
  2. Scoring candidate tiles — score every buildable tile by summed distance to
  sources and controller, take the minimum. Two rungs inside it: straight-line
  range (cheap, lies about walls) and real path length via PathFinder (costlier,
  honest).
  3. Flood fill — BFS from each source and the controller, producing per-tile
  distance maps; sum and take the minimum. The same scoring done right, and the
  canonical BFS teaching moment. A queue and a 50×50 array.
  4. Distance transform — score every tile by distance to the nearest wall;
  answers "where does a base fit". Two-pass dynamic programming, terrain grid
  only.
  5. Compose 4 + 2 — Overmind's BasePlanner: distance-transform candidates,
  filter out footprints crowding the controller or sources, score survivors by
  total real path length. Notably Overmind's default flow is still semi-manual —
  the human clicks, the bot checks — which is good evidence for the students
  that judgment plus checking is a respectable design.
  6. Whole-base planning (stamps, TooAngel's path-based layout) and min-cut 
  perimeters (max-flow) — capstone territory.

  The community's recurring caveat: the "closest to everything" tile is usually
  cramped or blocks the source's harvest tiles. Rungs 4–5 exist to counter that.
  That's a ready-made "why the naive answer fails" beat.

  What the repo already holds:

  - A working end-to-end programmatic placer existed in deploy-local and was
  deliberately removed (flake.nix now says placement is the player's act). It
  spiraled out from the room center over the terrain digit string and took the
  first buildable tile — rung 0.5, with the whole auth/world-status/retry loop
  already solved. The deleted code is preserved in the docs/unedited transcript.
  - Terrain is available over REST before placement. Source and controller
  positions arrive only over the socket, in the first room snapshot — a placer
  in the viewer has to wait for that snapshot before scoring.
  - Legal rooms come from the proxy's /placeable-rooms (reads db.json);
  world-start-room returns a controller-less room here, so the naive room choice
  fails with "invalid room".

  Frustration hazards to design around: the server explains refusals only as
  terse error strings; the empty/lost/respawn state machine is confusing when
  hit blind; and multi-room scoring needs per-room socket subscriptions. Any
  first-spawn challenge should hand students the auth + world-status scaffolding
  so the work is the placement logic itself.

  Ready to discuss the level 2/3 cut whenever you are.

✻ Cogitated for 16m 7s

※ recap: We're building tiered spawn-placement challenges for the tutorial-one fast-path blog; promise.md and narrative.md are redrafted, and the research on placement methods is reported above. Next: discuss which methods fit Bloom levels 2/3 versus harder.

❯ assume the room has already been chosen, the task is to find a good location  
  for a spawn placement when starting                                           

● With the room fixed, the task is pure tile selection: inputs are the 50×50
  terrain grid, the source positions, and the controller position — all
  available in the viewer before the click. Here's my proposed cut:

  Level 2 (understand). The student compares candidate tiles using stated
  criteria. Concrete task: we mark three candidate tiles in the room; the
  student computes each tile's summed range to the sources and controller, ranks
  them, clicks the winner, and watches how far the harvester walks. Small
  numbers, done by hand or with a few lines in the console. The payoff is the
  connection between the number and the walking they then watch.

  Level 3 (apply). The student writes the scorer: loop over all buildable tiles,
  score each by summed range to sources and controller, print the best tile,
  click it. Straight-line range only — a nested loop and an arithmetic function,
  with terrain and positions handed to them. This keeps pathfinding out of it:
  PathFinder only exists inside the game loop, and straight-line range needs
  nothing.

  The step up (analyze — the built-in trap makes it honest). Straight-line range
  lies about walls, and the best-scoring tile is often cramped or sits on a
  source's harvest tiles. The harder challenge: find where the naive answer goes
  wrong in this room, then fix it — a BFS flood fill from each landmark for
  true walking distance, plus a free-neighbor count so the winner has room to
  build. Both are implementable in plain JS over the terrain grid. This is where
  the community actually landed (Overmind filters for exactly these two
  failures), so the student ends the challenge having rediscovered a real bot's
  design.

  The stretch already in promise.md. Wire the recommendation into the placement
  itself — Api.placeSpawn is one call in viewer/src/protocol.ts, so "get the
  agent to auto-place with a useful strategy" means the student's scorer output
  feeds the call the click handler already makes. All the auth and world-status
  plumbing exists; the student's work stays the strategy.

  The frustration guard running through all four: the student's code recommends,
  and until the stretch the human still clicks. Every failure is visible on
  screen as a long walk or a cramped spawn, and the fix is a better number.

  One decision that shapes the exercise text: where the student's code runs — in
  the browser console against the viewer's loaded state, or as a small script
  that fetches terrain itself. Console is less setup; script is more portable.
  Your call.

✻ Worked for 34s

❯ we don't have a console available, the point is to generate that with         
  paradox. let's explore level 2 tasks. have then dfo the manual calculation    
  and then engae the llm agent to make paradox that implments                   

● That reshapes it well — the level 2 task then teaches the project's own
  workflow: the student understands the rule by hand, the LLM writes the spec,
  Paradox verifies and generates, and the student checks the generated logic
  against their own arithmetic.

  Proposed shape:

  Part one — by hand. The exercise gives the room facts: source positions,
  controller position, three marked candidate tiles. The metric is the game's
  range (diagonal steps count as one — one sentence to teach). The student
  computes each candidate's summed range to the landmarks, ranks the three,
  clicks the winner, and watches the harvester's walk. That's a handful of small
  subtractions — right-sized for paper.

  Part two — through the agent. The student tells the LLM agent what they just
  did: "write a spec for scoring a tile by summed range to the sources and
  controller." The agent writes the Paradox, the checker verifies it, Paradox
  generates the scorer. The student runs it against the same three candidates.

  The payoff. The generated logic's ranking matches the page in front of them.
  They understood the rule first, and the pipeline's output witnessed their own
  arithmetic. That's the workflow the whole project pitches — human directs and
  inspects, LLM writes the spec, checkers gate — experienced on a problem small
  enough to hold in their head. And it sets up level 3 cleanly: same scorer, all
  2,500 tiles, a scale where hand calculation stops being an option.

  Two facts I need from you before drafting exercise text:

  1. Can Paradox express this today — arithmetic over coordinates, a scoring
  function, comparison? Everything in dox/creeps.dox so far is enums and a body
  list, so I can't tell what the language supports from the repo.
  2. What runs the generated scorer against the room? The harness loop only runs
  after a spawn exists, so the exercise needs a runner that feeds terrain and
  landmark positions to the generated function and prints the result — does
  something like that exist, or is building it part of the work on this branch?

✻ Brewed for 28s

❯ why is controller position important, what about terrain ?                    

● Controller. Upgrading the controller is how the room levels up, and every
  level unlocks more of the game (extensions, towers, more spawns). Upgrading
  means creeps carrying energy to the controller and standing next to it, tick
  after tick — over a colony's life, the spawn-to-controller path is walked as
  much as the spawn-to-source paths. That's why every community scorer weighs
  it. But at this stage of the tutorial the loop on screen never touches the
  controller — the harvester goes source to spawn. So for the level 2 exercise
  the controller is a claim about the colony's future, and the honest option is
  to score by range to sources only and bring the controller in when an upgrader
  exists to walk that path.

  Terrain. It matters twice. First, legality: a spawn goes on plain or swamp,
  and the server rejects a wall tile. In the level 2 exercise we pick the three
  candidates, so legality is handled for the student. Second, truth:
  straight-line range assumes the creep walks straight, and walls make that a
  lie — a candidate that scores best on paper can sit across a wall from the
  source, and swamp tiles slow every crossing. At level 2 that lie is dormant
  because we choose candidates where it's small. At the analyze step it becomes
  the whole lesson: the student finds a room where the paper winner loses on
  foot, and terrain — the full grid — is the data that fixes the score.

  So the design consequence: sources-only, terrain-safe candidates at level 2
  keeps the hand arithmetic matched to what the student actually watches;
  controller and terrain each arrive later as the thing that breaks the simpler
  score.

✻ Cooked for 23s

❯ is there a level two approach that acknowledges terrain and controller as     
  important? It doesn't have to be an optimal solution, just a working one      

● Yes — a checklist plus a sum, which is exactly what the simplest real placers
  do (ScreepsAutoSpawner is a rule checklist at heart). Both factors enter, each
  in its hand-computable form:

  Terrain enters as rules, applied by eye on a printed map of the room:
  - the tile must be plain — one of the given candidates sits on swamp or
  against a wall pocket, so the student actually exercises the rule and rejects
  it;
  - the tile must have at least, say, five open neighbors — counted by looking
  at the eight surrounding squares on the map.

  Controller enters as a third landmark in the sum: score = range to source one
  + range to source two + range to the controller. Still a handful of
  subtractions per candidate.

  The procedure: cross out candidates that fail the terrain rules, score the
  survivors, click the best. That's a complete working strategy — it
  acknowledges that a spawn needs buildable ground with room around it and that
  the colony will walk to the sources and the controller — and it's suboptimal
  in a way the student can later discover rather than be warned about
  (straight-line range still ignores walls between the tile and the landmarks).

  It also translates cleanly into part two: "the tile is plain, the tile has at
  least five open neighbors, the score is the summed range to sources and
  controller, the best legal tile wins" is a rule the student can state to the
  LLM agent in one breath, and the spec implements the same checklist and sum
  they just ran on paper. The terrain rules only need the tile and its eight
  neighbors, so the generated logic reads nine grid cells per candidate — no
  pathfinding anywhere.

  The two open questions from before still gate the exercise text: whether
  Paradox expresses this arithmetic today, and what runs the generated scorer.

✻ Worked for 22s

❯ you tell me /home/mlitchard/gitlab/paradox                                    

● Sending an agent into the Paradox source to answer the expressiveness question
  from the language itself.

● Explore(Assess Paradox language expressiveness)
  ⎿  Done (60 tool uses · 94.1k tokens · 6m 58s)
  (ctrl+o to expand)

● Answer from the Paradox source: yes to the whole level-2 rule, with the 
  terrain grid staying on the TypeScript side.

  What the spec can express. The golden test corpus already contains almost the
  exact functions this exercise needs, at lib/test/golden/ in the paradox repo:
  absolute and maxVal written with if/then/else (there are no built-in abs/max —
  the student's agent writes them, which is a feature for the exercise), and a
  four-argument distance(x1, y1, x2, y2). Chebyshev range is maxVal (absolute 
  (x1-x2)) (absolute (y1-y2)), and the score is a plain sum of three of those.
  Predicates (>=, &&), a Point product type, lists of points, and stdlib
  sum/reduce all exist. Picking the minimum-scoring candidate has no builtin — a
  short recursion over the list, and the corpus shows that pattern working
  through codegen.

  Where the grid lives. The language has no array indexing and no way to take
  runtime grid input; spec functions compute over values handed to them. So the
  runner reads terrain and passes in what the rule needs — for the checklist
  that's nine cells per candidate, or just the precomputed open-neighbor count.
  The spec holds the rule, TypeScript holds the lookup. That split matches how
  the project already divides spec and harness.

  The checker makes this better than I'd hoped. Paradox has lemma blocks: named
  properties over scalar arithmetic that Z3 verifies — given/then/via, with
  verified lemmas feeding later ones as axioms. absolute x >= 0 is verified in
  the test corpus today. So the level-2 spec can carry real named properties
  about the very arithmetic the student did on paper: the range is symmetric in
  its two points, the score is never negative, a tile at a landmark scores zero
  for that term. The student hand-computes, the agent writes the spec, Z3
  verifies the named properties, the generated ranking matches the page. Limits:
  lemmas verify over scalars; anything touching lists or records comes back
  inconclusive and must be marked assume, and lemmas generate no runtime code.

  Two hazards found while reading: the shipped stdlib's take and any recurse on
  the wrong variable — the generated versions in this repo's generated/std.ts
  loop forever on most inputs (filter, find, all, drop, reduce are correct); and
  Paradox does no termination checking, so a recursion mistake in the student's
  argmin runs away silently rather than being rejected.

  So question 1 is settled: the language expresses the checklist, the sum, and
  the argmin, and the checker verifies named properties of the scoring
  arithmetic. Question 2 — what runs the generated scorer against the room — is
  still open on your side.

✻ Brewed for 5m 17s

❯ what do you mean who? what are you confused about                             

● The generated scorer is just an exported TypeScript function. For the student
  to see its output, something has to call it: fetch the room's terrain and the
  source and controller positions, hand it the candidate tiles, and show the
  resulting scores. The harness can't be that caller — its loop only runs after
  a spawn exists. So the missing piece is a runner: the viewer could do it (it
  already has terrain, the room snapshot, and the API token), or a small flake
  app could. My question is whether that runner already exists somewhere I
  haven't seen, or whether building it is part of the work on this branch.

✻ Worked for 7s

❯ the generated scorer should be run by the harness, what other option is       
  there?                                                                        

● The other options were the viewer and a standalone flake app — I reached for
  them because of a timing constraint, and it's the constraint itself we should
  settle, because if it doesn't hold on this server the harness is the clean
  answer.

  The reported constraint, from the repo scan: the server doesn't execute a
  user's script until the user owns something, and the first spawn is what makes
  them an owner. On top of that, game code only sees rooms where the user has
  objects — pre-spawn, Game.rooms is empty, so the harness would have no way to
  read the source and controller positions even if its loop ran. If both facts
  hold here, the harness literally can't compute the score before the first
  placement.

  That still leaves a harness-run design that I think fits level 2 well, and
  maybe better: the student places by hand first, using their paper calculation
  — that click is the act being examined. Then the harness, now running with
  full room vision, runs the generated scorer over the room and writes its
  verdict — best tile, and the score of the tile the student actually chose —
  into Memory.trace, where the viewer's inspector can show it. The student
  compares the spec's answer to their own. For the stretch, that same
  harness-computed recommendation is what feeds an automated placement on
  respawn.

  The one thing to verify before writing exercise text is whether this server
  really withholds execution pre-spawn — that's in the vendored engine's
  behavior, and I'd want it witnessed rather than assumed. Want me to check?

✻ Cooked for 33s

❯ are you saying people are not automating spawn placement?                     
● No — they automate it, and the research showed exactly where: outside the game
  loop. ScreepsAutoSpawner is a standalone tool that polls the HTTP API,
  notices the account is spawnless, picks a tile, and calls the same place-spawn
  endpoint the client's click calls. This repo did it too — the removed
  deploy-local block was a working HTTP auto-placer against this very server.
  And the famous bots automate everything from the second spawn onward in-game;
  players asked years ago for the first spawn to be placeable from game code,
  and the game never added it.

  So the split is layers: the first spawn gets automated over HTTP by an
  external program holding the auth token; every later spawn gets automated
  in-game. Nobody's first spawn is placed by their loop code, because the loop
  hasn't run yet.

  For the exercise that means the harness runs the scorer — the decision logic —
  and the automation of the first placement itself is HTTP plumbing that
  already exists in two forms in this repo's history (the viewer's placeSpawn
  call and the removed deploy-local placer). The open design question is just
  how the scorer's verdict, computed in the harness, reaches that HTTP call for
  the stretch challenge.

✻ Cooked for 11s

❯ focus on what I asking you to do stop creating problem. focus on what I am    
  asking you to do                                                              

● Understood. The design stands: the student does the calculation by hand —
  terrain checklist, summed range to sources and controller, three candidates —
  then engages the LLM agent to write the Paradox that implements that rule; the
  checkers verify it, and the harness runs the generated scorer. Ready to draft
  the exercise text on your word.

✻ Churned for 4s

❯ are we using a pre-made checklist?                                            

● My recommendation: yes, pre-made at level 2. The exercise states the rule —
  plain tile, at least five open neighbors, lowest summed range to the sources
  and controller — and the student's work is applying it by hand, then getting
  the agent to implement the same rule in Paradox and comparing outcomes.
  Understanding a given rule well enough to execute it and recognize its answer
  in the generated logic is the level 2 skill. Writing their own criteria is
  where the harder tiers start: the analyze step is discovering where the given
  rule fails, and improving the checklist is then the student's own act.

✻ Cooked for 6s

❯ five open neighbors suggests you are choosing the room. I need you to focus   
  on what I am asking you to do, stop making extra work                         

● Dropped. The room is given, the candidates are given. The checklist is: the
  tile is buildable, the score is the summed range to the sources and the
  controller, lowest score wins. The student runs that on paper over the given
  candidates, clicks the winner, then engages the agent to write the Paradox
  that implements the same rule. That's the level 2 exercise.

✻ Baked for 5s

❯ why can this not be in the game loop? the check is 'does a spawn1' exist? it  
  does not so run the strategy and place one. this covers the re-spawn case as  
  well.                                                                         

● Because the game gives loop code no instrument that creates a first spawn. The
  check is right — "no Spawn1, run the strategy, place one" — but at the
  placement step the loop has only createConstructionSite, and a construction
  site becomes a building through a creep with a WORK part spending energy on
  it. With no spawn there are no creeps, so the site would sit unbuilt forever.
  The first spawn is the one structure the game creates instantly, and the only
  door to that instant creation is the HTTP endpoint. Players asked for exactly
  what you're describing — first-spawn placement from game code — in a Screeps
  forum request years ago, and it was never added. Respawn lands in the same
  state: everything released, no creeps, same closed door.

  The shape you want survives intact one layer out: a runner that asks the API
  "does a spawn exist?" and, when the answer is no, runs the generated strategy
  and calls place-spawn. Same check, same Paradox-generated decision logic, and
  it covers respawn the same way. The removed deploy-local placer was exactly
  that loop minus the strategy.

✻ Brewed for 27s

❯ the harness is game code, I think we have to do this with a nix app nix run   
  .#spawn-placement. we're going to punt on this project and make it for after  
  the student has worked through until they get to main                         

● Agreed — the harness is game code, so the placer lives outside it as nix run 
  .#spawn-placement, and the whole challenge moves to after the student has
  worked through to main. Saving the design so it's not lost between sessions.

  Wrote 2 memories (ctrl+o to expand)

● Recorded: the challenge is deferred until the student reaches main, the runner
  will be nix run .#spawn-placement, and the settled level-2 design plus the
  Paradox expressiveness findings are saved so we can pick this up without
  redoing the research.

✻ Cogitated for 27s

❯ we need to come up with interesting assignments that stay within current      
  scope                                                                         

● Within-scope means assignments over what's already on the branch: the spec,
  the harness, the checkers, deploy, and the viewer. Reading the three files
  that define that surface so the assignments are grounded in what's actually
  there.

  Read 3 files (ctrl+o to expand)

● The surface is small and clean: two unions and a body list in the spec, a
  harness that spawns one harvester and runs its two-state life, two checkers,
  deploy, and the viewer. Here are four assignment candidates that stay inside
  it, each with the same rhythm — predict on paper, make one change, let the
  checkers speak, watch the result:

  1. The silent failure. Remove move from harvesterBody — a legal edit, so
  paradox check and tsc both pass. Predict what happens before deploying. Then
  watch: the creep spawns and stands there; a body needs a MOVE part to walk.
  The written question afterward: which instrument told you this was wrong? None
  — the checkers verify the named properties of the spec, and this property has
  no name there. You caught it by watching. That's the trust doctrine as a
  lived thirty-second experience, and it motivates every later question about
  what should be in the spec.

  2. The body under budget. Part prices: WORK 100, CARRY 50, MOVE 50. The
  current body costs 200, and the spawn holds 300. On paper: WORK harvests 2
  energy per tick, CARRY holds 50 — compute how many ticks the current creep
  takes to fill up, then design the best body 300 can buy and predict how it
  changes the loop you watch. Edit harvesterBody, deploy, time it on screen
  against your prediction. Hand arithmetic first, one spec edit, visible payoff
  — same shape as the placement exercise, fully in scope.

  3. Two harvesters, one number in the spec. The harness caps the colony at one
  creep with a bare < 1. The assignment: engage the agent to move that number
  into the spec — a harvesterCount constant — and have the harness import it,
  then set it to 2 and watch two creeps negotiate one source. Smallest possible
  taste of the real workflow: the student directs, the agent edits the spec, the
  checkers gate, and a game-visible behavior changes because a spec value did.

  4. The undeclared role. Ask the agent to add a builder to CreepRole in the
  spec, and nothing else. Run the checkers, read what each one says about a role
  that exists in the spec and appears nowhere in the harness. Then reverse it:
  give a creep memory a role the spec never declared and read tsc's rejection.
  This extends the existing exercise 3 from reading rejections into predicting
  which layer catches which mistake.

  The ladder across them: 1 is watching and reasoning, 2 adds hand calculation
  and a solo edit, 3 and 4 bring in the agent-writes-spec workflow. Your pen
  from here — say the word and I'll draft any of these into exercises.md.

✻ Crunched for 58s

❯ these are all handled in subsequent tutorials                                 

● Then tutorial-one's assignments stay in its own territory: running the system,
  placing the spawn by hand, and reading what's on screen — touching nothing
  the later tutorials teach. Three candidates in that lane:

  1. Near and far. Place the spawn beside the source, count ticks per delivery
  from the viewer. Then nix run .#reset-local, place across the room, count
  again. The student's own numbers witness that placement is a strategy question
  — which is exactly the seed for the post-main placement project, planted with
  the controls this tutorial already teaches.

  2. The paper scorer. The level-2 hand exercise stands on its own without the
  punted runner: three marked candidate tiles, summed range to sources and
  controller, lowest wins, click it. The map is the data, the arithmetic is the
  work, the harvester's walk is the witness. When they reach main, this rule is
  the one they'll hand to the agent.

  3. Whose world is it. Predict, then check: stop the server and restart — is
  the colony still there? Reset, and it's fresh. Both answers live in
  .server-data/, and the student witnesses that the world is a directory on
  their disk. This is the ownership beat of the whole accessibility story, made
  into a two-minute experiment.

  All three use only what this tutorial hands the student: the run commands, the
  viewer, the click, and their own arithmetic.

✻ Cooked for 34s

❯ i do not understand 2                                                         

● Assignment 2 is the paper half of the level-2 design we settled earlier, kept
  here because it needs nothing but the viewer and a pencil.

  The exercise text shows a picture of the room with three tiles marked A, B, C,
  and gives the positions of the two sources and the controller. The student
  computes, for each marked tile, three numbers: how many squares to source one,
  to source two, to the controller (diagonal steps count as one — that's the
  game's range). Add each tile's three numbers. Say A totals 41, B totals 28, C
  totals 35 — B wins. The student clicks B as their spawn placement and watches
  the harvester run its trips from there.

  So the student places their spawn using a stated rule and their own arithmetic
  instead of eyeballing. The other half of that design — engaging the agent to
  write the rule in Paradox and running it through the pipeline — is the part
  that waits for post-main. This half is just: here is a rule, apply it by hand,
  act on your answer.

✻ Brewed for 9s
※ recap: We're designing tutorial-one fast-path exercises that stay in run-and-engage scope. Three candidates are on the table: near-vs-far spawn placement, the hand-computed tile scorer, and server-state persistence. Next: your ruling on which go into exercises.md.

❯ I'm wondering what we can expect from this tutorial, I think subsequent       
  tutorials have better oppotunity for engagement. I think this tutorial might  
  be about engaging the llm agent to ask about the nix infrastructure the       
  harness and the paradox                                                       

● I think that's the right call, and it makes a virtue of this tutorial's
  constraint. The student just stood up a whole stack they don't understand yet
  — VM, nix, server, pipeline, viewer — and the one thing this stage uniquely
  owns is that everything they ran is sitting there, inspectable, with an agent
  in the shell to interrogate. Later tutorials teach changing the system; this
  one can teach questioning it, which is the workflow the whole project models:
  the agent is the channel, the student inspects and decides.

  The assignment pattern that makes it engagement rather than reading homework:
  every question comes with a verification act. Ask the agent, then check its
  answer against the source or the running system. Examples in this shape:

  - Ask where the game world lives on disk; verify by stopping the server,
  looking in the directory it named, and restarting.
  - Ask what `nix run .#deploy-local` actually does between the spec and the
  server; have the agent walk the pipeline, then go find the generated file it
  named and match one line back to dox/creeps.dox.
  - Ask why the harvester turns around when it's full; have the agent point to
  the lines in harness/main.ts, and read them with it.
  - Ask what the checker would say to a spec mistake before making it — then
  make it, run the check, and compare the agent's prediction to the actual
  rejection.

  That last beat matters for expectations: the agent's answers are claims, and
  this tutorial can make checking claims feel fast and natural — a habit set
  here that every later tutorial then uses. What we can honestly expect from
  tutorial-one: orientation, the question-then-verify habit, and the amazement
  staying where it already is — they ran the whole thing, and nothing in it is
  off limits to ask about.

✻ Baked for 22s

❯ update exercises.md with the question-then-verify assignments                 

  Read 1 file (ctrl+o to expand)

● Update(blog/tutorial-one/storyspace/fast-path/exercises.md)
  ⎿  Added 24 lines
      20     declare, run `nix flake check`, and read the compile error f
          rom
      21     tsc.
      22  
      23 +## Ask, then verify                                            
      24 +                                                               
      25 +Everything you just ran is on your disk, and the agent in your 
         +dev                                                            
      26 +shell has read it all. Each assignment here is one question and
         + one                                                           
      27 +check: ask the agent, then hold its answer against the source o
         +r the                                                          
      28 +running system. The answer is a claim; the file or the game is 
         +the                                                            
      29 +evidence; you decide.                                          
      30 +                                                               
      31 +4. Ask the agent where the game world lives on disk. Then stop 
         +the                                                            
      32 +   server (`nix run .#stop`), look inside the directory it name
         +d,                                                             
      33 +   start the server again, and confirm your colony is still the
         +re.                                                            
      34 +5. Ask the agent what happens between `dox/creeps.dox` and the 
         +server                                                         
      35 +   when you run `nix run .#deploy-local`. Have it walk the pipe
         +line                                                           
      36 +   step by step. Then open the generated file it named and matc
         +h one                                                          
      37 +   line in it back to the line of the spec it came from.       
      38 +6. Ask the agent why the harvester turns around when it's full.
         + Have                                                          
      39 +   it point to the exact lines in `harness/main.ts`, then read 
         +them                                                           
      40 +   yourself and watch one full trip in the viewer with those li
         +nes in                                                         
      41 +   front of you.                                               
      42 +7. Ask the agent what `paradox check` will say if `harvesterBod
         +y`                                                             
      43 +   uses a part the `BodyPart` union lacks. Write down its predi
         +ction,                                                         
      44 +   make the edit, run the check, and compare the actual rejecti
         +on to                                                          
      45 +   the prediction. Restore the spec afterward.                 
      46 +                                                               
      47  ## Out of scope for the fast path (linked to their story)
      48  
      49  - Build GUI-driven placement and then automate it — the gui-bot

● Done. exercises.md now has an "Ask, then verify" group after the
  run-and-engage exercises: four assignments, each one question to the agent and
  one check against the source or the running system — where the world lives
  (witnessed by a stop and restart), the deploy pipeline (verified by matching a
  generated line to its spec line), the harvester's turnaround (the lines in
  main.ts read against a watched trip), and a predicted checker rejection
  compared to the real one. The group opener states the rule of the game: the
  answer is a claim, the file or the game is the evidence, the student decides.

✻ Brewed for 22s

※ recap: We're building tutorial-one's fast-path blog. Promise and narrative are redrafted, spawn-placement automation is punted to post-main, and exercises.md now carries the ask-then-verify assignments. Next: your review of those drafts.

❯ why is the vm's fsType 9p. what requirement does it fulfill                   

● Looking up where the 9p mount is declared in the repo before answering.

  Searched for 1 pattern, read 1 file (ctrl+o to expand)

● fsType = "9p" appears twice in vm/module.nix:34-44, and the requirement it
  fulfills is live sharing of host directories into the guest using nothing but
  QEMU. 9p over virtio is QEMU's built-in directory export: the host passes a
  directory (workdir, repodir) as a virtual device, and the guest mounts it as a
  filesystem. There's no disk image to copy in, no network filesystem to
  configure, and both sides see the same files at the same moment — which keeps
  the onboarding constraint intact that the host needs only QEMU.

  Each mount carries a specific requirement:

  - ~/dev/work (workdir, the host's ~/vm-keys) exists so the student's SSH
  identity key is readable inside the VM at ~/work/identity — where
  SCREEPS_IDENTITY points (vm/module.nix:48) and where secrix finds the key to
  decrypt secrets. The key stays on the host; it's never baked into the VM image
  or copied onto its disk.
  - ~/dev/dox-populi (repodir) live-mounts the host's repo checkout, and
  tests/vm.nix:27 asserts exactly that. Edits made on the host are immediately
  what the VM builds and deploys — the VM never works from a stale clone.

  The mount options follow from that purpose: trans=virtio is the QEMU
  transport, 9p2000.L is the Linux dialect with proper permissions and
  ownership, msize raises the transfer chunk size, and nofail lets the VM boot
  even when a share is absent — matching run-vm.sh skipping WORKDIR when the
  directory doesn't exist.

✻ Crunched for 23s

※ recap: We're shaping the tutorial-one fast-path blog: promise.md and narrative.md are rewritten, and exercises.md now has the ask-then-verify assignments; the spawn-placement challenge is punted to post-main. Next action: your review of the exercises draft.

❯ take a look at my notes in exercises.md. I think 'in the trenches' , 'get     
  your hands dirty' or something similar might be a seperate file linked to     
  exercises.md. that way if you want to move along you can. on the other hand   
  if I require this section I am enforcing the message of 'don't assume you     
  don't have to get your hands dirty just because the klankers klanks.' but     
  reframed in a positive frame, not the ngative one I stated. let's explore     
  this, it's either an extra challenge or an integral part of the throughline.  
  in which case each section will have to have this added as part of it's       
  structure                                                                     

  Read 1 file (ctrl+o to expand)

● Read your notes. My read: this is integral to the throughline, and here's the
  reasoning.

  The project's own record is that the agent wrote every line and you directed
  and ruled on fit. Ruling on fit is a hands-in-the-file act — it's where
  authority actually comes from in this workflow. If the tutorials teach "run
  the agent, verify its claims" but hands-on shaping is optional, the student
  graduates into exactly the operator the blog warns about: someone who runs the
  pipeline and never develops the eye that inspection requires. The trenches
  work is where the eye gets built. That makes it a load-bearing beat of the
  message, and load-bearing beats recur — one per section, part of the
  structure.

  The positive frame is already in your exercise: craft. The agent's output is
  raw material; finishing it is your work, and working it by hand is how the
  code becomes yours. Wax on, wax off is the right shape — repetitive, small,
  real — because fluency comes from reps, and the student who has regrouped
  twenty attribute sets can read nix in a way the student who moved along
  cannot. Framed that way it's an apprenticeship beat, an invitation to mastery
  rather than a warning.

  The module.nix exercise is a strong first instance, and it fits the tutorial's
  verify rhythm for free: after regrouping, nix flake check still boots the VM
  — the student witnesses that they changed the shape and kept the behavior.
  That's the craftsman's loop in miniature: improve, then check you broke
  nothing.

  On the file question: both things are true at once. It lives in its own file —
  trenches.md or whatever name you rule — because the storyspace links
  everything anyway, and a separate node lets later sections link their own
  trenches work in parallel. But exercises.md presents it as part of the path,
  phrased as expected work with its own heading and link, so the structure says
  "this is the discipline" while the hypertext still lets a reader defer it. The
  choice between extra-challenge and integral isn't made by the file layout;
  it's made by how the fast path talks about it, and I'd have it talk about it
  as the discipline.

  If you rule integral, the structural consequence you named follows: each
  fast-path section's template gets a trenches slot, and tutorial-one's is the
  module.nix regroup.

✻ Churned for 42s

❯ integral it is, add the trenches slot to the structure                        

  Read 2 files, listed 1 directory (ctrl+o to expand)

● The slot goes in both structure files: the series shape (so every stage builds
  it) and tutorial-one's map (its concrete instance).

● Update(blog/tutorial-one/storyspace/blog-series-structure.md)
  ⎿  Added 7 lines
      69  drops the reader into the next stage — only EXIT does that, and
           it
      70  does it out loud.
      71  
      72 +- TRENCHES slot — every stage carries one. Hand-work on code th
         +e                                                              
      73 +  agent wrote for this stage: the student reshapes real lines b
         +y hand,                                                        
      74 +  then runs the stage's checks and witnesses that behavior held
         +. The                                                          
      75 +  craft beat of the throughline — the code becomes yours by wor
         +king                                                           
      76 +  it — so it sits on every path, in its own file linked from th
         +e                                                              
      77 +  stage's exercises.                                           
      78 +                                                               
      79  ## Edges carry intent
      80  
      81  A bare link makes a maze; a labeled link makes a path. Every ed
          ge

● Update(blog/tutorial-one/storyspace/structure/tutorial-one-structure.md)
  ⎿  Added 8 lines
      55  
      56  The gui-bot challenge is a link off the build node, not a path 
          step.
      57  
      58 +## Trenches slot (integral, every stage has one)               
      59 +                                                               
      60 +Tutorial-one's trenches work: regroup the repeated attribute pr
         +efixes                                                         
      61 +in vm/module.nix into nested attribute sets, then run `nix flak
         +e                                                              
      62 +check` and witness the VM still boots. The draft lives in      
      63 +fast-path/exercises.md ("In the trenches") and moves to its own
         + file,                                                         
      64 +fast-path/trenches.md, linked from the exercises. Wax on, wax o
         +ff.                                                            
      65 +                                                               
      66  ## Exercise index (always on screen)
      67  
      68  storyspace/structure/exercise-index.md — the persistent panel o
          f every

● Both structure files carry the slot now. blog-series-structure.md adds
  TRENCHES to the fixed per-stage shape: hand-work on code the agent wrote,
  checks run afterward to witness behavior held, on every path, own file linked
  from the stage's exercises. tutorial-one-structure.md records this stage's
  instance: the vm/module.nix regroup with nix flake check as the witness,
  noting the draft sits in exercises.md until it moves to fast-path/trenches.md.

✻ Worked for 42s

※ recap: Building tutorial-one's fast-path blog: promise, narrative, and exercises are redrafted, question-then-verify assignments added, spawn-placement challenge punted to post-main, and the trenches slot is now integral in both structure files. Next: move your trenches draft into fast-path/trenches.md on your word.

❯ when I install the vm now it's installing nixos buth then freezes instead of  
  completing, it gets as far as opening a shell, but it should quite out but    
  doesn't                                                                       
● Reading the installer definition to see how the install is supposed to run and
  power off.

  Searched for 1 pattern (ctrl+o to expand)

● The session temp filesystem is full — the earlier agent transcripts filled it.
  Clearing them so commands can run again.

  Ran 1 shell command (ctrl+o to expand)

✻ Churned for 1h 50m 24s

❯ you dont need to use df                                                       

  Searched for 1 pattern, read 1 file, ran 1 shell command (ctrl+o to expand)

● The installer definition shows one built-in way to land in exactly this state,
  and a couple of failure paths — checking what changed on this branch before
  giving a verdict.

  Ran 1 shell command (ctrl+o to expand)
  ⎿  Interrupted · What should Claude do instead?

❯ stop wasting time                                                             

● Verdict from the script itself: two paths leave the installer sitting at a
  shell with no poweroff, and only the last console lines distinguish them.

  1. The skip path — vm/installer.nix:49-52: if /dev/vda1 already exists the
  service prints "already partitioned — skipping auto-install" and exits 0.
  There is no poweroff on that path, so the installer just sits at the shell.
  This happens whenever the qcow2 kept partitions from an earlier attempt.
  2. Any mid-script failure — set -euo pipefail ends the service before line
  109's poweroff, same sitting shell.

  In the installer shell: journalctl -u dox-populi-auto-install --no-pager | 
  tail says which one. If it's the skip message, the fix is rm dox-populi.qcow2
  and rerun. If it's an error, the tail shows the failing step.

✻ Churned for 9s

❯ did you break the script?                                                     

● No. This session's edits are blog markdown, structure docs, and my memory
  files — vm/installer.nix, run-vm.sh, and flake.nix are untouched, and your
  working tree carries no changes to them either; the script on disk is exactly
  what the branch's commits left there. The journalctl tail will say what
  actually stopped it.

✻ Baked for 12s

❯ you are confused                                                              

● Tell me what I have wrong — which script are you asking about, and what did I
  misstate?

✻ Churned for 11s

❯ you are making assumptions about what is happening, stop doing that           

● Understood — no more theories. The next step needs evidence from the machine:
  what are the last lines on the installer console?

✻ Brewed for 4s

❯ there is no problem happening '[   34.823286] reboot: Power down              
  compacting /home/mlitchard/gitlab/dox-populi/dox-populi.qcow2 into            
  /home/mlitchard/gitlab/dox-populi/dox-populi-compact.qcow2...                 
  '                                                                             

● Good — the installer finished and powered down; what follows is the qcow2
  compaction step running on the host, which takes a while with no progress
  output. Nothing is stuck.

✻ Cogitated for 3s

※ recap: We're building tutorial-one's fast-path blog: promise, narrative, and exercises are redrafted, the spawn-placement challenge is punted to post-main, and the trenches slot is in the structure files. Your VM install completed fine; next is your call on the drafts.

❯ i did nix run .#arges -L --builders '' and it is still downloading from a     
  builder                                                                       

● --builders '' turns off remote build machines, and that's all it governs. The
  "downloading" lines come from substituters — binary caches — which are a
  separate mechanism: nix checks the caches before building anything locally,
  builders or no builders. To make this run without cache downloads, add
  --option substituters "" (or --offline to cut all network use). With
  substituters silenced, everything missing gets built locally.

✻ Baked for 14s

❯ I use substituters and still get a hang 'building                             
  '/nix/store/ij9n7avbgpmq1f2ww46l4kzdi8cmzsdp-wai-app-static-3.1.9.drv' on     
  'ssh-ng://build@100.107.101.14'...                                            
  building '/nix/store/17ckjsgng2rvm3lng161xzsq1s4kq2ma-test-framework-quickche 
  ck2-0.3.0.6.drv' on 'ssh-ng://build@100.107.101.14'...                        
  building                                                                      
  '/nix/store/fd6xizmgdhrmnbp89c67gwwilb9h0vl1-autodocodec-yaml-0.4.0.2.drv' on 
  'ssh-ng://build@100.107.101.14'...                                            
  copying 2 paths...                                                            
  copying path                                                                  
  '/nix/store/byi5dxdvclc9qc1p7v0kcj0r0xwmirkg-wai-app-static-3.1.9' from       
  'ssh-ng://build@100.107.101.14'...                                            
  copying path                                                                  
  '/nix/store/dh97vlpzy5g6aw6gazz2iz0kzgdqllj8-wai-app-static-3.1.9-doc' from   
  'ssh-ng://build@100.107.101.14'...                                            
  building                                                                      
  '/nix/store/wd2wppdz70zrldhxlk41rdix6rjjylw6-servant-server-0.20.3.0.drv' on  
  'ssh-ng://build@100.107.101.14'...                                            
  building '/nix/store/g3949ihrd8860fshhp7pcjfjqa                               
  '                                                                             
● The log answers why: the builds are still being dispatched to
  ssh-ng://build@100.107.101.14, so the --builders '' you passed never took
  effect. That's documented daemon behavior — builders is a restricted setting,
  and the daemon honors a client's override only from users listed in
  trusted-users. For anyone else it silently keeps using the system-configured
  builder list. So the flag was ignored, the Haskell derivations went to the
  remote builder, and the hang you're seeing is on that ssh connection — the
  output stops mid-line, which is where the stall is.

  Two things to check, both on your side: whether your user is in trusted-users
  (nix config show trusted-users, or the setting in your NixOS config), and
  whether the builder is actually working — ssh to build@100.107.101.14 and look
  for a running ghc. If the builder is dead or unreachable mid-build, that's
  the hang; disabling it for real means either running the command with sudo,
  being added to trusted-users, or removing the machine from the system builder
  config.

✻ Churned for 24s

❯ it was working but is stuuck at the moment                                    

● Two states look identical from your terminal, and one check on the builder
  separates them: ssh build@100.107.101.14 top (or ps aux | grep ghc).
  servant-server is one of the big Haskell packages, and ssh-ng streams almost
  nothing while ghc grinds — a busy ghc there means it's a long compile, leave
  it. An idle builder means the build or the connection died; Ctrl-C the local
  command and rerun it — nix picks up from the store paths already built and
  copied.

✻ Crunched for 10s

❯ [mlitchard@polymetis:~/gitlab/dox-populi]$ sudo tailscale up                  
  [sudo] password for mlitchard:                                                
  Some peers are advertising routes but --accept-routes is false                
                                                                                
  [mlitchard@polymetis:~/gitlab/dox-populi]$ ssh to build@100.107.101.14        
  ssh: Could not resolve hostname to: Name or service not known                 
                                                                                

● The to went in as a hostname — the command is ssh build@100.107.101.14 top.

✻ Sautéed for 3s

❯ [mlitchard@polymetis:~/gitlab/dox-populi]$ ssh build@100.107.101.14           
  build@100.107.101.14: Permission denied (publickey,keyboard-interactive)      

● Your daemon does the remote builds as root, so the build account trusts root's
  key rather than yours. Try sudo ssh build@100.107.101.14 top — and if the
  machine entry names a specific key (sshKey in your nix.buildMachines /
  /etc/nix/machines), pass it with -i.

✻ Crunched for 5s

❯ [mlitchard@polymetis:~/gitlab/dox-populi]$ sudo ssh build@100.107.101.14      
  build@100.107.101.14: Permission denied (publickey,keyboard-interactive).     

● The daemon must be using a dedicated key file rather than root's default. sudo
  cat /etc/nix/machines — the entry for 100.107.101.14 names the key path as
  one of its fields. Then sudo ssh -i <that-path> build@100.107.101.14 top.

✻ Sautéed for 4s

❯ [mlitchard@polymetis:~/gitlab/dox-populi]$ sudo cat /etc/nix/machines         
  ssh-ng://build@100.107.101.14 x86_64-linux /run/nix-daemon-keys/hyperhyper 10 
  10 big-parallel,kvm - -                                                       

● The key is /run/nix-daemon-keys/hyperhyper. So: sudo ssh -i 
  /run/nix-daemon-keys/hyperhyper build@100.107.101.14 top

✻ Cogitated for 3s

❯ [mlitchard@polymetis:~/gitlab/dox-populi]$ sudo ssh -i                        
  /run/nix-daemon-keys/hyperhyper build@100.107.101.14                          
  PTY allocation request failed on channel 0                                    
                                                                                
  ┎                                                                             
  ┃    UNAUTHORIZED ACCESS TO THIS DEVICE IS PROHIBITED                         
  ┃                                                                             
  ┃    You must have explicit, authorized permission to access or configure     
  this                                                                          
  ┃    device. Unauthorized attempts and actions to access or use this system   
  may                                                                           
  ┃    result in civil and/or criminal penalties. All activities performed on   
  this                                                                          
  ┃    device are logged and monitored.                                         
  ┃                                                                             
  ┃    Platonic.Systems                                                         
                                                                                

● The key works — you're connected — but that account only speaks the nix-daemon
  protocol: no PTY, no shell, so top through it is off the table. Unless you
  have a personal login on that machine (it's a Platonic.Systems box), you can't
  inspect the builder directly.

  The local route: Ctrl-C the stuck run, then sudo nix build .#arges -L 
  --builders '' — under sudo you're a trusted user, so the flag actually takes
  effect and the remaining derivations build locally. After that nix run .#arges
  starts from the finished store path.

✻ Sautéed for 15s

❯ bad advice '[nix-shell:~/gitlab/deploys]$ sudo nix run .#arges -L --builders  
  '' --substituters ''                                                          
  [sudo] password for mlitchard:                                                
  warning: Git tree '/home/mlitchard/gitlab/deploys' has uncommitted changes    
  evaluation warning: 'system' has been renamed to/replaced by                  
  'stdenv.hostPlatform.system'                                                  
  tee: /tmp/deploy-arges.log: Permission denied                                 
  '                                                                             

● Split the build from the run — root builds, you run:

  sudo nix build .#arges -L --builders ''
  nix run .#arges

  The first command only builds (no deploy script executes under root). Once the
  store paths exist, the second runs as you and finds everything already built
  — the tee to /tmp then happens as your user again.

✻ Baked for 10s

❯ i need you to stop guessing and wasting time '[nix-shell:~/gitlab/deploys]$   
  sudo nix build .#arges -L --builders ''                                       
  warning: Git tree '/home/mlitchard/gitlab/deploys' has uncommitted changes    
  error: flake 'git+file:///home/mlitchard/gitlab/deploys' does not provide     
  attribute 'packages.x86_64-linux.arges', 'defaultPackage.x86_64-linux.arges', 
  'legacyPackages.x86_64-linux.arges' or 'arges'                                
  '                                                                             

● Reading the deploys flake to get the real attribute instead of guessing it.

  Searched for 1 pattern, read 1 file (ctrl+o to expand)

● arges is a nixinate deploy app, and the thing it builds is exposed as a check
  — arges-build (flake.nix:82). So:

  sudo nix build .#checks.x86_64-linux.arges-build -L --builders ''
  nix run .#arges

  The first builds the whole arges system locally with the builder disabled; the
  second, run as you, finds the toplevel already in the store and goes straight
  to the deploy.

✻ Cogitated for 13s

※ recap: Blog work on tutorial-one is done for now (exercises, trenches slot, structure). We're unsticking your arges deploy, whose remote builder hung. Next: run sudo nix build .#checks.x86_64-linux.arges-build -L --builders '' then nix run .#arges.

❯ tell me how to find my installs via the browser                               
  Searched for 1 pattern, read 1 file (ctrl+o to expand)

● The installs are served at https://dokyard.dev/installs/ — a browsable file
  listing (file_server browse) over /var/lib/dokyard/installs on arges, defined
  in services/dokyard.nix.

✻ Sautéed for 13s

※ recap: Tutorial-one fast-path blog work is drafted (promise, narrative, exercises, trenches slot); we then debugged your arges deploy around the stuck remote builder. Your installs browse at https://dokyard.dev/installs/. Next: run sudo nix build .#checks.x86_64-linux.arges-build -L --builders '' then nix run .#arges.